the savanah posed new challenges for
hominids that had evolved from forest
dwellers here walking upright had its
advantages
among them the use of the arms to carry
loads and the ability to spot danger and
exposed terrain
miles of Sun parched landscape with a
domain of a diverse and ferocious group
of predators and there were few places
to hide when they were on the attack
to avoid sharing their kill with
intruders leopards muscle them up a tree
rare specimens from these Huns can be
found in South Africa bones that tumbled
into a cave and fossilized deer and
rabbit are among the most common
fossilized remains here but evidence of
a new man ape was also recovered the
fossils of Paranthropus robustus or
robust almost man a hominid that
appeared 2 million years after Lucy in
the back of its skull were two enormous
puncture marks the holes are a perfect
match with the fangs of a leopards jaw
from that era
even solidly built hominids like this
one were not immune from attack
the size and shape of the brain somewhat
resemble a gorilla's and weigh about the
same as Lucy's just over a pound but
other features of the skull are more
human looking
alongside the ancient hominid
paleontologists recovered artifacts
never seen in Lucy's era stone tools the
accepted theory is that only after the
brain had enlarged and intelligence
developed could hominids fashioned tools
out of stone but with its still
primitive sized brain was Paranthropus
robustus
a tool maker for dr. Susman the answer
may not lie with the brain but in the
anatomy of the hands animals that have
this metacarpal head and these added
muscles that we find in humans and
presumably in these early human
ancestors these animals are able to do
what humans and presumably our early
ancestors could do namely pick up an
object between the thumb and the fingers
pick up an object with a refined
precision grasp chimpanzees and gorillas
when they similarly grasped small
objects they grasp them between the edge
of the thumb and the side of the index
finger in a very less effective
precision type grasp so chimpanzees and
gorillas pick up small objects like this
humans and presumably our early
ancestors who had these additional
muscles pick up small objects not like a
chimpanzee but in a more advanced
precision way where the thumb is opposed
to the other fingers so here we have an
ape type precision grasp and here we
have a human type precision grasp
they're very different and the two types
of grasp reflect this primitive
morphology in the case of a chimpanzee
and the more advanced morphology in the
case of a modern human or human ancestor
this is the hand of Paranthropus
robustus
like a modern humans his thumb bone is
thick indicating well-developed muscles
it is also splayed these signs tell
Sussman that tool-making was within
reach to pick up a small object humans
use the tips of our thumbs and
forefingers though we do it
unconsciously this movement requires
precise control but long slender hands
and a narrow thumb it's doubtful that
Lucy's family were tool makers though
they may have used them their bones look
more like chimpanzees than modern humans
the chimpanzees thumbs are
disproportionately short and thinner
than their fingers with very little
muscle tone
with hands like hooks chimpanzees are
not dexterous enough with their thumbs
to retrieve and manipulate small objects
and it's likely that Lucy fared no
better
dr. Susman believes that with the
evolution of fully opposable thumbs
Paranthropus robustus became one of the
planets first tool makers
Lucy's arrival three million years ago
marked a turning point in history no
longer dependent on four limbs for
walking or swinging through the treetops
our hominid ancestors use their hands to
gather food work with tools and perhaps
even to communicate with others Homo
erectus skeletons uncovered on planet of
life